---
title: "When Are Dream Endings Okay?"
date: 2019-06-08T19:53:43-05:00
draft: true
categories: []
---

Think of the worst explanation of a story you can possibly imagine.  Think of
the most frustrating fan theory you've ever run across in your online
explanations.  Think of the most lazy ending to a story ever written, an ending
that is a favorite of fourth-graders and showrunners alike.  Got it?  Say it
with me now:

*"And then I woke up."*

God, it made me cringe just to *write* that.

Every single person that I've ever talked to has agreed that this ending is
beyond terrible, that it's unconscionable to finish your story by revealing that
*none of it happened.*  It was all just a fantasy! Just a little boy playing by
himself making up stories in his little head, just havin' a good ol' time!  Just
imagining someone writing this into their story makes me want to weep and gnash
my teeth.

I'd say the most infamous example of this is the series finale for the
television show *St. Elsewhere.*  At the end of the show, it's revealed that all
of the episodes took place inside a snowglobe owned by Tommy Westphall, an
autistic 10-year-old boy.

Most people responded like this:  **WHY.  Why?**  Why would the writers of the
show think that the most satisfying possible conclusion of this beloved show
would be to tell the audience that it *wasn't real*?

[In an interview][1], showrunner Tom Fontana admitted that out of all the
possible conclusions to the show, they had chosen the snowglobe ending because
it was the "least bad."  And it was true, in a sense: at least we didn't get an
ending where Dr. Westphall admits that he was *the gunman on the grassy knoll.*
But that's not a particularly high bar, is it.

And yet there are several stories that I like or love that use incredibly
unreliable narrators.  In that regard, I think that fiction is uniquely situated
to present the unreliability of a single perspective, and I find it most
effective when it is the perspective that I have been seeing from that is shown
to be wrong.

[1]: https://paleymatters.org/tom-fontana-and-the-st-elsewhere-snow-globe-series-finale-307d63449ea7
